---
id: a937airthreatconference
title: Pentagon Command Center Begins Air Threat Conference Call
time: 2001-09-11T09:37:00.000Z
endTime: 2001-09-11T09:39:00.000Z
timelines:
  - Federal Aviation Administration
  - Key Events of 9/11
  - NORAD
  - Pentagon

---

The National Military Command Center (NMCC) at the Pentagon commences an "air threat conference" at 9:37 a.m. in response to the terrorist attacks, which will last for more than eight hours and have numerous high-level government and military officials participating at various times.

**NORAD Reports Two More Hijackings** - Captain Charles Leidig opens the call at 9:39 a.m. [[9/11 Commission, 7/24/2004, pp. 37-38][1]] As the acting deputy director for operations (DDO) in the NMCC during the attacks, Leidig is responsible for moderating the air threat conference and generating a military response to the crisis. [[9/11 Commission, 4/29/2004][2]] He begins the call saying: "An air attack against North America may be in progress. NORAD, what's the situation?" NORAD says it has conflicting reports, and its latest information is of "a possible hijacked aircraft taking off out of JFK [International Airport in New York], en route to Washington, DC." [[9/11 Commission, 7/24/2004, pp. 38][1]] NORAD says the FAA has also passed it information about a second additional hijacking. Major Charles Chambers, who is currently on duty in the NMCC, will later recall, "This was probably a communications mix-up, but we all thought for a while that there were a total of five hijackings." [[US Department of Defense, 9/2001][3]]

**NMCC Reports Pentagon Attack** - The NMCC reports that there has been a crash into the mall side of the Pentagon and requests that the secretary of defense be added to the conference. (However, despite being in the Pentagon when it is hit, Defense Secretary Donald Rumsfeld will not enter the NMCC and join the air threat conference until around 10:30 a.m. (see [(10:30 a.m.)  September 11, 2001](/timeline/#a1030rumsfeldshows)).) [[9/11 Commission, 7/24/2004, pp. 38][1]] The air threat conference is broadcast over a loudspeaker inside the NMCC. [[US News and World Report, 8/31/2003][4]] According to Chambers, "Questions were flying left and right on the conference, and trying to keep things straight was very difficult." [[US Department of Defense, 9/2001][3]]

**NORAD Recommended Air Threat Conference** - Leidig and Commander Pat Gardner, the assistant DDO, had earlier on decided to convene an all-purpose "significant event conference" in response to the attacks on the World Trade Center. That call commenced at 9:29 a.m. (see [9:29 a.m.-9:34 a.m. September 11, 2001](/timeline/#a929nmcccall)). NORAD had recommended that it be reconvened as an air threat conference. [[9/11 Commission, 4/29/2004][2]; [9/11 Commission, 7/24/2004, pp. 37][1]] According to Chambers, an air threat conference is used when aircraft are considered to be hostile and involves many more people than are in a significant event conference, including the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, the secretary of defense, and officials from the White House. [[US Department of Defense, 9/2001][3]] However, Leidig thought a significant event conference was the correct kind of call for the situation. He will tell the 9/11 Commission that an air threat conference "had Cold War implications and brought a different group of people to a conference." [[9/11 Commission, 4/29/2004][2]] Gardner will say that threat conferences are intended for dealing with external threats. [[9/11 Commission, 5/12/2004][5]]

**Deputy Director Ordered Upgrading of Conference** - All the same, Leidig gave the order to transition to an air threat conference. [[9/11 Commission, 7/24/2004, pp. 37][1]] He will tell the 9/11 Commission that, in retrospect, the reason he thinks he did so "was because he perceived an air threat at that time." [[9/11 Commission, 4/29/2004][2]] Therefore, the significant event conference was brought to an end at around 9:34 a.m., and resumes as an air threat conference three minutes later. [[9/11 Commission, 7/24/2004, pp. 37][1]] Staff Sergeant Val Harrison could have established the air threat conference either by leaving all of those participating in the significant event conference on the line and then adding new participants one at a time, or by simply hanging up on everyone in the significant event conference and then having the computer do a mass dialing. Harrison recommended the second option. Leidig had agreed, and directed her to disconnect the conference call and start over. 

**Problem with Connecting Some Agencies** - As happened with the significant event conference, there are problems connecting several agencies to the air threat conference. [[US Department of Defense, 9/2001][3]] Despite repeated attempts, operators struggle to get the FAA connected (see [(9:29 a.m.-12:00 p.m.) September 11, 2001](/timeline/#a929nmccstruggles)), and it will take until 10:17 a.m. for an FAA representative to finally join the call (see [10:17 a.m. September 11, 2001](/timeline/#a1017nmccconference)). [[9/11 Commission, 7/21/2003][6]; [9/11 Commission, 7/24/2004, pp. 37][1]] Other agencies had not understood what Leidig meant about convening the new conference, and so did not hang up their phones when the NMCC disconnected the previous conference call. As a result, all the NMCC got from them was a busy signal over the line. Chambers will recall, "As with the [significant event conference], it took longer than expected to convene the [air threat conference]." [[US Department of Defense, 9/2001][3]]

**Top Officials Participate** - Throughout the more than eight hours the air threat conference is running for, numerous key officials will participate in it at various times, including President Bush, Vice President Dick Cheney, Deputy National Security Adviser Stephen Hadley, acting Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff Richard Myers, military personnel from the Presidential Emergency Operations Center below the White House, and the president's military aide on Air Force One. [[9/11 Commission, 7/24/2004, pp. 37][1]] Brigadier General Montague Winfield, the original DDO, who had Leidig take his place so he could attend a pre-scheduled meeting (see [8:30 a.m. September 11, 2001](/timeline/#a830rookienmcc)), will later recall, "All of the governmental agencies… that were involved in any activity that was going on in the United States… were in that conference." [[ABC News, 9/11/2002][7]]

**Winfield Runs Conference after Returning to Post** - Winfield will take over the running of the air threat conference from Leidig after returning to his post at around 10:30 a.m. (see [(10:30 a.m.) September 11, 2001](/timeline/#a1030winfieldreturns)). [[CNN, 9/4/2002][8]; [9/11 Commission, 4/29/2004][2]; [9/11 Commission, 6/17/2004][9]] But although NMCC conference calls are moderated by the DDO, Rumsfeld will use the DDO's phone to participate in the air threat conference, meaning that Winfield is unable to moderate the conference when the defense secretary is participating. [[9/11 Commission, 7/21/2003][6]]

[1]: https://web.archive.org/web/20041020144854/http://www.decloah.com/mirrors/9-11/911_Report.txt
[2]: https://web.archive.org/web/20101128161902/http://media.nara.gov/9-11/MFR/t-0148-911MFR-00684.pdf
[3]: https://www.scribd.com/document/12992817/First-hand-Account-of-Day-of-9-11-by-Maj-Charles-Chambers-Stationed-in-the-NMCC
[4]: https://web.archive.org/web/20060228212229/https://www.usnews.com/usnews/news/articles/030908/8sept11.htm
[5]: https://www.scribd.com/doc/14274414/DH-B2-Cmdr-Gardner-DOD-Fdr-Entire-Contents-Handwritten-Interview-Notes-May-12-2004-NOIWON
[6]: https://catalog.archives.gov/OpaAPI/media/2610351/content/arcmedia/9-11/MFR/t-0148-911MFR-00756.pdf
[7]: https://911research.wtc7.net/cache/pentagon/attack/abcnews091102_jenningsinterviews.html
[8]: http://transcripts.cnn.com/TRANSCRIPTS/0209/04/ltm.11.html
[9]: https://www.9-11commission.gov/archive/hearing12/9-11Commission_Hearing_2004-06-17.htm
